So, we are looking at the problem of constructing
a minimum cost spanning tree in a weighted
graph. We said there we have two basic strategies
one could think of to do this. The first one
leads to an algorithm called Prim's algorithm,
and the second one leads to an algorithm called
Kruskal's algorithm. So, in this lecture we
would look at Prim's algorithm.
So, the problem domain is the following. We
have a weighted undirected graph. So, V is
the set of vertices, E is the set of edges
and w is a weight function. We assumed that
G is connected, because if G is not connected
and there is no way to build a spanning tree.
Spanning tree, remember is a sub set of the
edges which connects all the vertices in G.
So, G is not already connected, then there
is no way we can actually connect using a
subset of edges. So, G is a connected weighted
undirected graph, and now we want to identify
spanning tree with minimum weight. So, this
strategy in Prim's algorithm starts with the
minimum cost edge, and keep extending the
tree with the smallest edge connected to the
current tree.
So, here is a kind of high level version of
prim's algorithm, right. So, we start with
minimum cost edge and we add it to the list.
So, TE is a list of edges that form a tree.
So, we will describe the tree as a collection
of edges, and then we note that we have added
i and j to the tree. So, i and j are now connected.
So, this leaves n minus 2 vertices which have
to be connected. So, we have to do something
n minus 2 times. So, n minus 2 times we have
to add an edge. Each time we add an edge;
one more vertex would be connected. So, we
know that after that many edges, you will
have a tree. Remember that the tree has totally
n minus 1 edge. So, we have added the first
edge by starting with a minimum cost edge.
So, we can add n minus 2.
So, what we do is, n minus 2 times, we choose
the smallest edge which has one end point
in the tree and one end point outside the
tree. So, this is a vertex v now which is
not connected to the tree. So, we connect
it. So, we append this new edge to our list
of tree edges and we add this vertex to our
list of tree vertices, and at the end after
doing this n minus 2 times, it claim as we
connected all the edges, we have a spanning
tree and more over the claim is because we
are choosing the minimum cost edge to add
a each point. The overall thing is a minimum
cost spanning tree. Of course, we will not
prove all this, but this is what we aim as
prim's algorithm, right.
So, why do we need to prove something? Well,
you can see that like Dijkstra's algorithm,
prim's algorithm is a very greedy algorithm,
right. At each point, we have to decide how
to extend the tree. So, we look in the neighbourhood
that the current tree, we look for the nearest
vertex which is connected to the tree, but
the shortest edge and we add it. So, this
is a local choice, and then we keep making
these sequences of local choices and ultimately,
we arrive globally at a spanning tree and
out claim is globally we have built the best
possible tree, right. So, this is always an
example of a greedy algorithm where you make
a sequence of local choices. Never go back
and reconsider them and finally, achieve a
global optimum and very often as we mentioned
before with the Dijkstra's algorithm, such
a strategy may not give you the right thing.
So, you have to always justify that this works.
So, in order to prove prim's algorithm correct
and indeed, we will also use this to prove
Kruskal's algorithm, correct later on. We
prove a very useful lemma all the minimum
separator lemma. So, let us assume that we
have this weighted undirected graph and we
look at the set of vertices v, right and we
assume that it is divided into two paths,
right. So, this is called partitioning. So,
there are two separate disjoint paths which
I will call u and w, and I am assuming that
both of these are non-empty. So, there is
at least one vertex u and one vertex w. Now,
let me look at the smallest edge which goes
across this partition. Remember that the whole
graph is connected. So, there must be a way
to go from u to w. So among all the ways I
can go from u to w. Let me check the smallest
edge. Let me call the end point small u and
small w.
So, now, the claim is that every minimum cost
spanning tree must include this edge. This
is a very powerful claim. Of course, there
is a side condition which is that we are assuming
for a moment at no two edges have the same
way. We will see later on how we will relax
this condition, right. So, under the condition
that no two the edges at the same weight,
the minimum separator lemma says that whenever
you separate V in to do parts which are not
empty, then the smallest edge connecting these
two parts must lie in every spanning tree,
every minimum cost spanning tree.
So, now why is the case? So, let us assume
that we have these two parts. So, I will draw
one part say this yellow thing and let us
call this u and which have not drawn a boundary
for, this is v, and this is w.
So, now let us look at the smallest edge connecting
u and w, right. So, now the claim is that
this must be in every minimum cost spanning
tree. So, suppose it is not. So, then suppose
there must be some minimum cost spanning tree,
because we know that the graph is connected.
So, there are many spanning trees and let
us assume that the minimum cost spanning tree
T which does not include this edge.
So, in that tree u must be connected to the
tree, because any spanning tree connects all
the vertices. So, there is a red path from
u to w in my hypothetical spanning tree T
which does not include this edge. So, now
the claim is if I take that particular tree,
and then I remove the edge u prime v prime
and replace it by the edge u v get a new tree,
right. I get tree T prime . So, T prime is
T minus edge u prime v prime plus the edge
u v, but now by assumption u v was the smallest
vertex, smallest weight edge going from inside
u to outside u, right. So, therefore, u v
has weight strictly less than u prime v prime.
Therefore, T prime has a weight strictly less
than T and you can check that everything else
is connected because anything which have connected,
so u prime is now connected v prime through
this long thing and therefore, all other vertices
which connect by T remain connected by T prime.
Therefore, T prime is a valid spanning tree.
It is of smaller cost and therefore, T could
not have been a minimum cost spanning tree.
So, this is a proof that the smallest cost
edge from inside the partition to outside
the partition must lie in every minimum cost
spanning tree.
Before we move ahead, I just want to make
one small remark. So, we would have to be
careful when we prove this lemma a little
bit. So, it is true that among all the edges
going from inside to outside, u v is the smallest
one. So, we might be tempted to just say,
so uv is the smallest one, pick any edge in
my given tree T prime given tree T which goes
from inside to outside, then replace. So,
for instance, we might accidentally pick up
this edge and replace it with this edge. Notice
by picking up this edge and replace it with
this edge, then perhaps there is no other
way to get a double prime, right. So, it is
very crucial that we choose that correct edge
to replace. So, we have a target and we want
to introduce u to v. Therefore, we must follow
the path in T from u to v and that path must
start inside and go outside. So, it must cost
the boundary somewhere, and this is the edge
to replace. So, we should not make the mistake
of replacing some arbitrary edge. We must
replace that edge which allows us to go from
u to v in the hypothetical tree, not at to
make the new tree.
So, once we had this lemma, the correctness
of prim's algorithm is very obvious. So, at
every stage remember in prim's algorithm,
we have built this tree TV which consists
of a few edges, and then we have everything
just lying outside and now among these we
want to connect one of them, right. So, if
you think of this set the set inside is my
u and the set outside is my w, and we are
picking by assumption in prim's algorithm,
the smallest weight edge which connects u
to w. By this minimum separator lemma, this
edge must line every spanning tree. So, the
algorithm, the prim's algorithm, the edge
that the prim's algorithm picks is in fact
the edge that the lemma forces us to pick.
So, therefore, prim's algorithm is definitely
correct.
So, in fact we can use the lemma to make prim's
algorithm little more relaxed. Recall that
narrow regional formulation we started with
the smallest edge, but now it is easy to see
that if I take any vertex, right and I look
at all the edges going out of it, then I can
take u to v the vertex itself and I can take
w to be everything else, the set minus this
vertex. Then, I know that the smallest edge
which goes from v to this edge must be in
every spanning tree. In other words, if I
start at any vertex and look at the smallest
edge attached to it, I can start with that
because that must be in every spanning tree
by the minimum separator lemma.
So, this gives us the following algorithm
for prim's strategy. So, we start with any
vertex s. Now, for each vertex which is not
in our current set of tree vertices, we maintain
the smallest edge weight from that vertex
to some tree vertex so we called that distance
of v and also because we want to build up
the tree the set of edges, we remember where
that edge goes to. So, we remember it does
have a neighbour, right. So, if I have some
tree at any given point and I know that for
this v, this neighbour u is the smallest edge
connecting it to v, then here I will keep
it as distance as the weight of the edge,
I will keep it as neighbour as u. This will
allow me to keep track of which edges are
added. So, now, at every stage I look for
the smallest vertex which is outside in terms
of the distance. Then, I add it to the set
and I update its neighbour’s distances and
values, right. So, this is very similar to
Dijkstra's algorithm, right. The only thing
is the update of the distance does not involve
adding my distance plus the weight. It only
involves considering the weight. So, when
see the algorithm itself, we will see the
parallel Dijkstra's algorithm even clearer.
So, here is the final algorithm for prim's
shortest or minimum cost spanning tree right.
So, you initialize all vertices to be unvisited.
This is the burnt thing. We initialize them
all to have no neighbours, because nothing
is in the tree. So, they have no neighbours
in the tree and they are all distance infinity.
This is initialisation. Now, I pick some initials
starting vertex, say 1 and mark it to be visited,
but I do not have any edges, right. So, now
for each edge going out of 1, I update its
status. So, I say for every edge one of the
form 1, j, I said that the neighbour of j
in the tree, so the tree now consists of just
this one vertex and trivial tree which has
one vertex and therefore, 1 -1 0 edges, right.
So, the neighbour of j is 1 because that is
its connection and the distance is the weight
of this edge, right. So, this is my first
step.
Now, I have to add the remaining n minus 1
edges to my tree. So, n minus 1 times I do
what you do in Dijkstra's algorithm in different
format. You pick that u which is not visited
and whose distance is minimum. Mark it as
visited. Now, you know how it is connected
to the tree. So, you add the edge which tells
us how it is connected u and neighbour of
u. This edge we add to the set of tree edges.
Now, for every edge out of u whose neighbour
is not visited, if the current distance to
the tree is more than the weight of this edge,
so basically I had now added this u and there
is another vertex v and it claims to be connected
somewhere else, right. So, maybe this distance
d and this distance d prime. Suppose d is
bigger than d prime, then now that this is
in the tree, now that u has been added in
the tree, now v is connected by a smaller
edge to the tree, right. So, the distance
that I currently have for b is bigger than
the weight of u v edge. Then, I will replace
that weight by the weight of the u v h and
I will say the neighbour of v is now u, so
that when I add v to the tree, I will add
the edge u.
So, this is exactly what Dijkstra's algorithm
does except for this update, in this update
we add d of u plus the weight of u, right.
So, we in Dijkstra's algorithm, we want cumulative
distance. Here we want one step distance from
the nearest node in the tree, but otherwise
prim's algorithm is basically a restatement
or Dijkstra's algorithm with a different update
function and additionally we have this thing
that we could have done it in Dijkstra's also.
We could have maintained the Dijkstra's algorithm
the path, right. So, had we maintained the
path, it will be exactly like this neighbour
relation here. We want to know when these
edges added to my shortest paths set, the
burnt set, why it was added, right. So, here
we are doing that we are adding it and we
are also remembering the edge to that.
So, let us try and execute before during the
complexity analysis of these things. So, remember
we can start anywhere. So, let us start at
1, right. We start at 1 and we mark our tree
consisting of 1. Now, since this is an edge
start at 1, we have to update the values in
the neighbours of 1, namely at 2. So, we mark
for 3. We say that is the distance which we
mark in green, so the tree is 18 because the
tree consist vertex 1 and it is neighbour
in the tree which is at the distance is the
vertex 1. Similarly, the other neighbour of
1 is 2. So, we will say is its distance is
10, and its neighbour is 1, right. So, everywhere
else I have not mentioned it explicitly, but
everywhere else the values are minus 1 and
sorry, infinity and minus 1. So, this is infinity
and neighbour is minus 1. So, this is the
default value. So, wherever the default value
is present, we will just leave it out indicating
that the value is effectively not been cyclic.
We know it is a connected graph. So, we will
eventually set it. So, you do not have worry
about it, but in this discussion we just leave
it out. So, we have these two candidates now
which are not visited and which have some
reasonable distance associated. So, we will
pick smaller than 2. So, we pick this one
which is 10, and therefore at a next step
we visit the vertex 2 and we add this edge
1 2 to our tree.
Now, having added 2, we have this update.
So, we look at the neighbours. So, the neighbours
of 2 are the vertex 3 and vertex 5. So, for
the vertex 2, from 2 we have a new distance
6. So, if you go via to the distance of 3
to the tree is 6 and there it could be connected
to 2 which is 6 is smaller than 18, right.
So, 18 was earlier best estimate of how far
3 were in the tree.
So, you will replace 18, 1 by 6, 2 indicating
now the vertex 3 is 6 distance away from the
tree, and if it were to be connected at the
distance, it could be connected to 2. Similarly,
5 which was earlier unlabelled, now becomes
labelled as 22 indicating that its distance
is 20 from the tree and its neighbour in the
tree is the label vertex v. Now, we again
pick the smaller of the two. So, we will pick
this vertex 3 to add to the tree, right.
Once we add it, you will obtain the status
of 4 because that is the only new label we
do not update the status of 1 because 1 is
already been added to the tree. We only look
at those neighbours of tree which are not
visited. So, now 4 gets the distance 70 with
the neighbour 3, and then among these two,
now 20 is smaller than 70.
So, we will add 5 to our tree, and then we
will update the status of 6 and 7.
So, 6 is now distance 10 with neighbour 5,
7 is also is distance 10 with neighbour 5.
Now, we have two vertices with distance 10.
We could pick either one. So, let us for example
pick 7. If we pick 7, then we add it to the
tree and now, we update the status of the
6. Earlier it was a distance 10 with neighbour
5, but now it is a distance 5 with neighbour
6. So, we reduce it with neighbour 7. We reduce
its distance and we change its neighbour.
Now, among 5 and 17, we have 6 as the vertex,
6 as the newer one, and then we had finally
4 and this is the tree that we get. This is
how prim's algorithm works. It is very similar
to Dijkstra in principle but it uses a very
different update.
So, the complexity also is similar to Dijkstra's
algorithm. We have an outer loop which runs
n times order n times because we have to add
n minus 1 edge to form that tree and at each
iteration, we add vertex with the tree. Now,
there is this order n scan in order to find
the minimum cost vertex to add. So, we already
saw this is a bottleneck in dijkstra's algorithm
to find the minimum distance vertex to add,
and then when we add a vertex, we have to
do and again a scan to update all the entries.
So, we have an adjacency matrix. This will
again take order n time and therefore, overall
it takes order n square.
So, exactly as Dijkstra's algorithm moving
an adjacency matrix to adjacency list representation
of the edges allows us to reduce the complexity
of the updates. So, across the n iterations,
we do a total of order m updates because we
update only according to the neighbours, the
degree, the sum of the degrees of all the
vertices. However, in order to bring that
the order n square, we also need to able to
compute the minimum distance efficiently for
which we need a heap, right. So, once we have
a heap which we will examine in a later lecture,
the claim is we can find the minimum and update
the distance in n log time. So, this gives
us overall complexity exactly like Dijkstra,
m log n plus m log n.
So, this comes from finding the minimum because
n time we have to find the minimum and this
comes from the updates, because we have to
do m updates overall. Each updates takes log
n times, so we get m plus n log n exactly
as we did for Dijkstra's algorithm.
So, one last point before we leave prim's
algorithm. Remember that in the correctness
we have to use that minimum separator lemma
in which we had assumed that edge weights
are distinct. So, of course we have seen in
the example that we executed, we could have
edges, multiple edges with the same weight.
So, how do we deal with this in the lemma?
Well, we could argue with that you can make
that cost to be not just exactly the weight,
but the weight plus some other term. So, in
general we could say that we fix some overall
ordering of the edges. There are m edges.
So, we just number the edges arbitrarily 1
to n and we say that one edge is smaller than
the edges smaller way if either the weight
is actually is smaller or the weights are
equal, but the index in the ordering is small,
right. So, e and f we have the weight of uv
and the weight of u prime and v prime, but
we also have the index i and j.
So, this is some i between 1 to m and this
is some j between 1 to m. So, either weight
of e must be smaller than weight of f or the
weights are equal, then i must be smaller
than j, right. So, this gives us a time breaking
rule. So, this will now basically tell us
that we can always compare two edges and declare
one is smaller than the other and what prim's
algorithm will do is pick the smaller, right.
So, we want this corresponds to saying is
that we are actually giving a strategy for
choosing when we have two equal things. So,
the algorithm says choose the u such that
distance which is minimum and if multiple
use with the same minimum distance, we pick
an arbitrary point. So, what is meant is to
pick an arbitrary point whether it means some
sense to choose an order among them and go
in that order. Therefore, if you choose different
orderings, then we get different trees. So,
therefore we have multiple edges in a tree
which have the same weight. In general, we
may not get a unique spanning tree. In fact,
you can check if you have all weights the
same for example. Basically you have to keep
adding or dropping different edges and you
will have an exponential number of trees because
an edge could be there in one tree and may
not be there in another tree and so on, right.
So, overall the number of possible minimum
cost spanning tree could be very large. What
prim's algorithm does and what Kruskal's also
will do when we look at in the next lecture
is to use a greedy strategy to efficiently
pick out one of these possible things. Now,
if the edge weights are unique, there is not
much choice. You have to pick up same tree.
If the edge weights are duplicated, you can
definitely have multiple trees and this strategy
of picking out the smallest one at each stage
will give us a quick way to identify one of
the smallest ones, but not a unique one.